Chunk 1:
Nội dung từ file 2.pdf  Short Notes in ANATOMY First year  Nursing college By Dr. Wasfi Dhahir 20172018 المعلىماث في هذه الم لز مت تعتبز خطىط دالت ومالحظاث تشيز الى المىاضيع المنهجيت ودليل لمزاجعت المصادر المعتمدة لهذه لمادة التشزيح References Kenneth.S Saladin 2007anatomy and physiology.4th edition Eliane N. Marieb 2007 human anatomy and physiology 7th edition San Francisco CA94111. Gary A and Kevin T 2007 anatomy and physiology 8th edition . printed by United States of America Anne W. na Allison Grant 2010 anatomy and physiology 11th edition .British library . printed in chaina. Susannah N . 2005 Mader, S understanding Human anatomy and physiology , 6th edition 3 Introduction of human body Human anatomy is one of the basic essential sciences of medicine, concerned with the study of the structure of organisms and their parts including their systems, organs and tissues. Anatomy mean cutting parts It includes 1The appearance 2Position of the various parts

Chunk 2:
. Anatomy mean cutting parts It includes 1The appearance 2Position of the various parts. 3The materials from which they are composed. 4 Their locations . 5Their relationships with other parts. Methods used include dissection, in which a body is opened and its organs studied, and endoscopy, in which a video cameraequipped instrument is inserted through a small incision in the body wall and used to explore the internal organs and other structures. Angiography using Xrays or magnetic resonance angiography are methods to visualize blood vessels. In addition to visual, there are three other methods by which anatomy is studied palpation, which is physical contact Auscultation, such as when a doctor listens to your breathing and percussion, such as when a doctor taps on your chest. Medical devices such as CT scans or magnetic resonance imaging MRI, and dissection can also be used to assist in the study of anatomy

Chunk 3:
. Medical devices such as CT scans or magnetic resonance imaging MRI, and dissection can also be used to assist in the study of anatomy. Types of anatomy Comparative anatomy description and comparison of the form and structure of different animals. Developmental anatomy the changes in form from fertilization to adulthood, including embryology, fetology and postnatal development. Gross anatomy Macroscopic anatomy that dealing with structures visible with the unaided eye. Called also macroscopic anatomy. Microscopic anatomy anatomy revealed by microscopy includes histology and cytology. Morbid anatomy anatomy of diseased tissues. Called also pathological anatomy. Pathological anatomy see morbid anatomy above. Radiological anatomy anatomy revealed by the techniques of radiography and fluoroscopy. Special anatomy anatomy devoted to study of particular organs or parts. Topographic anatomy that devoted to determination of relative positions of various body parts regional anatomy

Chunk 4:
. Special anatomy anatomy devoted to study of particular organs or parts. Topographic anatomy that devoted to determination of relative positions of various body parts regional anatomy. Xray anatomy Tissue cells All organisms, from the simplest to the most complex, are composed of cellswhether the single cell of a bacterium or the trillions of cells that constitute the human body. These cells are responsible for all structural and functional properties of a living organism. Cytology, is the science deal with the study of cell structure and function, is therefore indispensable to any true understanding of the workings of the human body, the mechanisms of disease, and the rationale of therapy. The modern cell theory 1. All organisms are composed of cells and cell products. 2. The cell is the simplest structural and functional unit of life. There are no smaller subdivisions of a cell or organism that, in themselves, are alive. 3

Chunk 5:
. 2. The cell is the simplest structural and functional unit of life. There are no smaller subdivisions of a cell or organism that, in themselves, are alive. 3. An organisms structure and all of its functions are ultimately due to the activities of its cells. 4. Cells come only from preexisting cells, not from nonliving matter. All life, therefore, traces its ancestry to the same original cells. 5. Because of this common ancestry, the cells of all species have many fundamental similarities in their chemical composition and metabolic mechanisms. Cell Shapes and Sizes Most human cells range from 10 to 15 micrometers um in diameter. The human egg cell, an exceptionally large 100 um in diameter. Elementary tissues of the body Human body generally consist of five elementary tissues 1Epithelial tissue consists of a flat sheet of closely adhering cells, one or more cells thick, with the upper surface usually exposed to the environment or to an internal space in the body

Chunk 6:
. Epithelium covers the body surface, lines body cavities, forms the external and internal linings of many organs, and constitutes most gland tissue. aSimple Epithelia Generally, a simple epithelium has only one layer of cells, although this is a somewhat debatable point in the pseudostratified type. Three types of simple epithelia are named for the shapes of their cells 1 simple squamous thin scaly cells. 2 simple cuboidalsquare or round cells, 3 simple columnar tall narrow cells. 4 pseudostratified columnar, not all cells reach the free surface the shorter cells are covered over by the taller ones. bStratified Epithelia Stratified epitheliarange from 2 to 20 or more layers ofcells, with some cells resting directly on others and only the deepest layer resting on the basement membrane. The stratified epithelia are three types 1 stratified squamous, 2 stratifiedcuboidal, 3 stratified columnar epithelia

Chunk 7:
. The stratified epithelia are three types 1 stratified squamous, 2 stratifiedcuboidal, 3 stratified columnar epithelia. 4 Transitional epithelium, was named when it was thought to represent a transitional stage between stratified squamous and stratified columnar epithelium. 2Connective tissue Typically consists mostly of fibers and ground substance, with widely separate Fibrous Connective Tissue aFibrous connective tissues are the most diverse type of connective tissue. They are also called fibroconnective tissue or connective tissue proper. The cells of fibrous connective tissue include the following types Fibroblasts. These are large, flat cells that often appear tapered at the ends and show slender, wispy branches. They produce the fibers and ground substance that form the matrix of the tissue.. Macrophages. These are large phagocytic cells that wander through the connective tissues, where theyengulf and destroy bacteria, that produce monocytes

Chunk 8:
. Macrophages. These are large phagocytic cells that wander through the connective tissues, where theyengulf and destroy bacteria, that produce monocytes. Leukocytes, white blood cells WBCs.WBCs travel briefly in the bloodstream, then crawl out through the capillary walls and spend most of theirtime in the connective tissues.. Plasma cells. Certain lymphocytes turn into plasma cells when they detect foreign agents. The plasma cells then synthesize diseasefighting proteins called antibodies. Mast cells. These cells, found especially alongside blood vessels, secrete a chemical called heparin that inhibits blood clotting, and one called histamine that increases blood flow by dilating blood vessels. AdipocytesADihposites. fat cells.These are large rounded cells filled mainly with a droplet of triglyceride, which forces the nucleus and cytoplasm to occupy only a thin layer just beneath the plasma membrane

Chunk 9:
. fat cells.These are large rounded cells filled mainly with a droplet of triglyceride, which forces the nucleus and cytoplasm to occupy only a thin layer just beneath the plasma membrane. Fibers Three types of protein fibers are found in fibrous connective tissues CollagenouscolLADJehnusfibers. These fibers, made of collagen, are tough and flexible and resist Reticular fibers. These are thin collagen fibers coated with glycoprotein. They form a spongelike framework for such organs as the spleen and lymph nodes. Elastic fibers. These are thinner than collagenous fibers, and they branch and rejoin each other along their course. They are made of a protein called elastin, whose coiled structure allows it to stretch and recoil like a rubber band. Ground Substance Amid the cells and fibers in some tissue sections, there appears to be a lot of empty space

Chunk 10:
. Ground Substance Amid the cells and fibers in some tissue sections, there appears to be a lot of empty space. In life, this space is occupied by the featureless ground substance.Ground substance usually has a gelatinous to rubbery consistency resulting from three classes of large molecules 1glycosaminoglycans. 2proteoglycans. 3adhesive glycoproteins. Types of Fibrous Connective Tissue 1 Loose connective tissue a Areolar AIReeOHlur tissue b Reticular tissue

Chunk 11:
. 2proteoglycans. 3adhesive glycoproteins. Types of Fibrous Connective Tissue 1 Loose connective tissue a Areolar AIReeOHlur tissue b Reticular tissue. c Adipose tissue ,or fat, 2 Dense connective tissue a Dense regular connective tissue Densely packed, parallel, often wavy collagen fibers slender fibroblast nuclei compressed between collagen bundles scanty open space ground substance scarcity of blood vessels b Dense irregular connective tissue Densely packed collagen fibers running in random directions scanty open space ground substance few visible cells scarcity of blood vessels 3Bone The term bonerefers both to organs of the body such as the femur and mandible, composed of multiple tissue types, and to the bone tissue, or osseous tissue,that makes up most of the mass of bones. There are two forms of osseous tissue 1Spongy bone fills the heads of the long bones. Although it is calcified and hard, its delicate slivers and plates give it a spongy appearance

Chunk 12:
. There are two forms of osseous tissue 1Spongy bone fills the heads of the long bones. Although it is calcified and hard, its delicate slivers and plates give it a spongy appearance. 2Compact dense Bone is a more dense calcified tissue with no spaces visible to the naked eye. It forms the external surfaces of all bones, so spongy bone, when present, is always covered by compact bone. Cartilage Cartilageis a supportive connective tissue with a flexible rubbery matrix. It gives shape to the external ear, the tip of the nose, and the larynx the most easily palpated cartilages in the body. Cells called chondroblasts a Hyaline cartilage Clear, glassy matrix, often stained light blue or pink in tissue sections fine, dispersed collagen fibers, not usually visible chondrocytes often in small clusters of three or four cells cell nests, enclosed in lacunae usually covered by perichondrium. b Elasic cartilage Elastic fibers form weblike mesh amid lacunae always covered by perichondrium

Chunk 13:
. b Elasic cartilage Elastic fibers form weblike mesh amid lacunae always covered by perichondrium. c Fibro cartilage Parallel collagen fibers similar to those of tendon rows of chondrocytes in lacunae between collagen fibers never has a perichondrium Blood Blood is a fluid connective tissue that travels through tubular vessels. Its primary function is to transport cells and dissolved matter from place to place. Blood consists of a ground substance called plasma and of cells and cell fragments collectively called formed elements. Erythrocytes ehRITHrosites, or red blood cells, are the most abundant formed elements. In stained blood films, they look like pink discs with a thin, pale center. They have no nuclei. Erythrocytes transport oxygen and carbon dioxide. Leukocytes, white blood cells, serve various roles in defense against infection and other diseases

Chunk 14:
. They have no nuclei. Erythrocytes transport oxygen and carbon dioxide. Leukocytes, white blood cells, serve various roles in defense against infection and other diseases. 4Nervous Tissue Nervous tissue consists of neuronsNOORons, or nerve cells, and a much greater number of neuroglia nooROGleeuh, or glial GLEEul cells ,which protect and assist the neurons. Neurons are specialized to detect stimuli, respond quickly, and transmit coded information rapidly to other cells. Each neuron has a prominent soma, or cell body, that houses the nucleus and most other organelles. This is the cells center of genetic control and protein synthesis. Somas are usually round, ovoid, or stellate in shape. Extending from the soma, there are usually multiple short, branched processes called dendrites that receive signals from other cells and transmit messages to the soma, and a single, much longer axon ,or nerve fiber, that sends outgoing signals to other cells

Chunk 15:
. Nervous tissue is found in the brain, spinal cord, nerves, and ganglia, which are knotlike swellings in nerves. 5Muscular Tissue Muscular tissue consists of elongated cells that are specialized to respond to stimulation by contracting thus, its primary job is to exert physical force on other tissues and organsfor example, when a skeletal muscle pulls on a bone, the heart contracts and expels blood, or the bladder contracts and expels urine. aSkeletal muscle Long, cylindrical, unbranched cells fibers, relatively parallel in longitudinal tissue sections striations multiple nuclei per cell, near plasma membrane. bCardiac muscle Short branched cells myocytes less parallel appearance in tissue sections striations intercalated discs one nucleus per cell, centrally located and often surrounded by a light zone. CSmooth muscle Short fusiform cells overlapping each other nonstriated one nucleus per cell, centrally located

Chunk 16:
. CSmooth muscle Short fusiform cells overlapping each other nonstriated one nucleus per cell, centrally located. Cell structure and function The plasma membrane Is the unit membrane at the cell surface. It defines the boundaries of the cell, governs its interactions with other cells, and controls the passage of materials into and out of the cell. The side that faces the cytoplasm is the intracellular face of the membrane, and the side that faces outward is the extracellular face. The plasma membranean oily film of lipids with diverse proteins embedded in it. Typically about 98 of the molecules in the membrane are lipids, and about 75 of the lipids are phospholipids. These amphiphilic molecules arrange themselves into a bilayer, with their hydrophilic phosphatecontaining heads facing the water on each side of the membrane and their hydrophobic tails directed toward the center of the membrane. Membrane Proteins 1 Integral transmembrane proteins, pass through the membrane

Chunk 17:
. Membrane Proteins 1 Integral transmembrane proteins, pass through the membrane. They have hydrophilic regions, most integral proteins are glycoproteins, which are conjugated with oligosaccharides on the extracellular side of the membrane. 2nPeripheral proteinsdo not protrude into the phospholipid layer but adhere to the intracellular face of the membrane. Membrane proteins include the following Receptors The chemical signals by which cells communicate with each other Secondmessenger systems.When a messenger binds to a surface receptor, it may trigger changes within the cell that produce a second messenger in the cytoplasm. Enzymes. Enzymes in the plasma membranes of cells carry out the final stages of starch and protein digestion in the small intestine, help produce second messengers, and break down hormones and other signaling molecules whose job is done, thus stopping them from excessively stimulating a cell

Chunk 18:
. Channel proteins Channel proteins are integral proteins with pores that allow passage of water and hydrophilic solutes through the Carriers Carriers are integral proteins that bind to glucose, electrolytes, and other solutes and transfer them to the other side of the membrane. Some carriers, called pumps,consume ATP in the process. Molecular motors These proteins produce movement by changing shape and pulling on other molecules. Cellidentity markers . Are glycoproteins contribute to the glycocalyx,a carbohydrate surface coating discussed shortly.  Celladhesion molecules. Cells adhere to one another and to extracellular material through certain membrane proteins called celladhesion molecules CAMs. Cellular compartments in cell biology comprise all of the closed parts within the cytosol of a eukaryotic cell, usually surrounded by a single or double lipid layer membrane. These compartments are often, but not always, defined as membrane enclosed regions

Chunk 19:
. These compartments are often, but not always, defined as membrane enclosed regions. The formation of cellular compartments is called compartmentalization. Most organelles are compartments 1mitochondria is a double membranebound organelle found in most eukaryotic cells. The word mitochondrion comes from the Greek μίτος, mitos, i.e. thread, and χονδρίον, chondrion, i.e. granule2 or grainlike. It is also the powerhouse of the cell. 2peroxisomes, lysosomes, Also called microbodies are organelles found in virtually all eukaryotic cells.2 They are involved in the catabolism of very long chain fatty acids . 3 the endoplasmic reticulum Is a type of organelle in the cells of eukaryotic organisms that forms an interconnected network of flattened, membraneenclosed sacs or tubelike structures known as cisternae. The endoplasm is the inner core of the cytoplasm and the membranes of the ER are continuous with the outer nuclear membrane 4 the cell nucleus In cell biology, the nucleus pl

Chunk 20:
. The endoplasm is the inner core of the cytoplasm and the membranes of the ER are continuous with the outer nuclear membrane 4 the cell nucleus In cell biology, the nucleus pl. nuclei from Latin nucleus or nuculeus, meaning kernel is a membraneenclosed organelle found in eukaryotic cells. Eukaryotes usually have a single nucleus, but a few cell types have no nuclei, and a few others have many. Cell nuclei contain most of the cells genetic material. 5 Golgi apparatus. known as the Golgi complex, Golgi body, or simply the Golgi, is an organelle found in most eukaryotic cells. It was identified in 1897 by the Italian physician Camillo Golgi and named after him in 1898. Golgi body is a part of the cellular endomembrane system, the Golgi apparatus packages proteins into membranebound vesicles inside the cell before the vesicles are sent to their destination. 6 Smaller elements like vesicles, and sometimes even microtubules can also be counted as compartments

Chunk 21:
. 6 Smaller elements like vesicles, and sometimes even microtubules can also be counted as compartments. SKIN Skin is the soft outer covering of vertebrates. The adjective cutaneous means of the skin from Latin cutis, skin. The skin is an organ of the integumentary system made up of multiple layers of ectodermal tissue, The skin interfaces with the environment and is the 1first line of defense from external factors. 2 excessive water loss 3insulation, 4 temperature regulation 5 sensation. 6The production of vitamin D. Skin layers Epidermis The epidermis is composed of the outermost layers of the skin. Keratinocytes are the major cells, constituting 95 of the epidermiswhile Merkel cells, melanocytes and Langerhans cells are also present. The epidermis contains no blood vessels, and cells in the deepest layers are nourished by diffusion from blood capillaries extending to the upper layers of the dermis

Chunk 22:
. The epidermis contains no blood vessels, and cells in the deepest layers are nourished by diffusion from blood capillaries extending to the upper layers of the dermis. The epidermis can be further subdivided into the following strata or layers beginning with the outermost layer. Stratum corneum Stratum lucidum only in palms and soles Stratum granulosum Stratum spinosum Stratum germinativum also called the stratum basale Keratinocytes in the stratum basale proliferate through mitosis and the daughter cells move up the strata changing shape and composition as they undergo multiple stages of cell differentiation to eventually become anucleated

Chunk 23:
. During that process, keratinocytes will become highly organized, forming cellular junctions desmosomes between each other and secreting keratin proteins and lipids which contribute to the formation of an extracellular matrix and provide mechanical strength to the skin Keratinocytes from the stratum corneum are eventually shed from the surface desquamation. Basement membrane The epidermis and dermis are separated by a thin sheet of fibers called the basement membrane, and is made through the action of both tissues. The basement membrane controls the traffic of the cells and molecules between the dermis and . Dermis The dermis is the layer of skin beneath the epidermis that consists of connective tissue and cushions the body from stress and strain. Papillary region The papillary region is composed of loose areolar connective tissue.This is named for its fingerlike projections called papillae that extend toward the epidermis

Chunk 24:
. Papillary region The papillary region is composed of loose areolar connective tissue.This is named for its fingerlike projections called papillae that extend toward the epidermis. The papillae provide the dermis with a bumpy surface that interdigitates with the epidermis, strengthening the connection between the two layers of skin. Reticular region The reticular region lies deep in the papillary region and is usually much thicker. It is composed of dense irregular connective tissue . within the reticular region are the roots of the hair, sebaceous glands, sweat glands, receptors, nails, and blood vessels. Hypodermis The hypodermis is not part of the skin, and lies below the dermis. Its purpose is to attach the skin to underlying bone and muscle as well as supplying it with blood vessels and nerves. It consists of loose connective tissue and elastin. Basrah University College of Nursing Department of medical sciences Lecturer Dr

Chunk 25:
. It consists of loose connective tissue and elastin. Basrah University College of Nursing Department of medical sciences Lecturer Dr. Wasfi Dhahir Subject Anatomyy Stage1st nursing Digestive system The science which study the digestive tract and the diagnosis and treatment and its disorders called gastroenterology. Anatomically the digestive system subdivided for two anatomical parts 1The digestive tract is a tube extending from mouth to anus and called alimentary canal include mouth , pharynx, esophagus, stomach, small intestine and large intestine. Stomach and intestine called GI gastrointestinal tract. 2The accessory organs include teeth tongue, salivary gland, liver, gall bladder and pancreas. The main function of the digestive system is to processes food and extracts nutrient from it and eliminate the residue and this occur in four stages 1 Ingestion The selective intake of food 2 Digestion Mechanical and chemical break down of food

Chunk 26:
. 3 Absorption uptake of nutrients molecules into the epithelial cells of digestive tract to blood and lymph. 4 Defecation the elimination of indigestive residue. Most of the digestive tract follows the basic structural composed of the following tissue layers, in order from the inner to the outersurface Mucosa Epithelium Lamina propria Muscularis mucosae Submucosa Muscularis externa Inner circular layer Outer longitudinal layer The mouth The moth oral cavity serves for ingestion. Sensory response to food, mastication. Chemical digestion ,deglutition, speech and respiration. The mouth is enclosed by the cheeks, lips, palate, and tongue . Its anterior opening between the lips is the oral orifice and its posterior opening into the throat is the fauces FAWseez. The oral cavity is lined with non keratinized stratified squamous epithelium. Mastication is the breakdown of food into pieces smaller to be walled and exposed it to chemical digestion

Chunk 27:
. The oral cavity is lined with non keratinized stratified squamous epithelium. Mastication is the breakdown of food into pieces smaller to be walled and exposed it to chemical digestion. Salivary gland There are three pairs of salivary gland aextrinsic 1Parotid gland 2submandibular gland 3Sublingual gland bintrinsic 1 Lingual 2 Buccle 3 labial Function of saliva The gland secrete about 11 L of saliva per day 1. moisten 2. Digest starch. 3. Clean the mouth. 4. Inhibit bacterial growth. 5  Make the food as bolus. The pharynx is muscular funnel and it is of two parts, the respiratory part  nasopharynx and the oral part  orapharynx and aid in swallowing

Chunk 28:
. 4. Inhibit bacterial growth. 5  Make the food as bolus. The pharynx is muscular funnel and it is of two parts, the respiratory part  nasopharynx and the oral part  orapharynx and aid in swallowing. The esophagus muscular tube extend from pharynx till stomach lubricated by mucosa., its main function swallowing of food and drink to stomach which drop by gravity and peristalsis movement, The stomach  is J  shape relatively vertical in tall people and horizontal in short people have two curvature ,the lesser and greater curvature and two opening the in latecardiac orifice and pyloric orifice the gate way

Chunk 29:
. and four regions 1 The fundus 2 The body 3 Pyloric 4 Antrum Function of the stomach  Storing  Mixing  Digestion  Emptying The cell of stomach  Mucosal cell secrete mucus  Stem cells produce new cells  Parietal cells secrete HCL  Chief cells secrete chymosinPepsinogen and lipase  Enteroendocrine cells secrete hormones The small intestine It began at the pyloric orifice the gate way from stomach and ends at the ileocecal junction gate way of the large intestine. It consist of duodenum25cm ,jejunum2.5meter and ileum3.6 meter the internal surface contain villi with absorptive cells and goblet cells. The movement of intestine include segmentation contraction and wave of peristalsis called migration motor complex

Chunk 30:
. The movement of intestine include segmentation contraction and wave of peristalsis called migration motor complex. Chemical digestion and absorption in small intestine  Amylase digests the starch to monosaccharide  Pepsin digests proteins to amino acids  Lipids digests by lingual lipase and gastric lipase and most of it digested by pancreatic lipase and bile helps in breaking the fat into emulsification droplets to triglycerides and to monoglycerides and fatty acids and then absorbed to blood through villi. Large intestine It is about 1.5 meter consist of the cecum, ascending colon right site of abdomen , descending colonleft site of abdomen , transverse colon, rectum , anal canal and anus

Chunk 31:
. Large intestine It is about 1.5 meter consist of the cecum, ascending colon right site of abdomen , descending colonleft site of abdomen , transverse colon, rectum , anal canal and anus. The large intestine absorbs water and salts from indigestible food, Accessory organs The liver Is largest reddish brown gland located immediately inferior to the diaphragm in the right hypocondral and Epigastric region, has four lobes left ,right ,quadrate and caudate lobes separated from each other by falciform ligament. Gall bladder Greenish sac on the underside of the liver which store and concentrate billwater, fat , cholesterol, phospholipids, bile pigment and bile acids act on lipids digestion Note Bile pigments cause the brown color of feces Pancreas pink lobulated gland located between the fold of the duodenum secrete hormoneinsulin and glucagon and enzyme lipase , amylase and trypsin ,chymotrepsin and carboxypeptidase which digest proteins

Chunk 32:
. Cardiovascular System The term circulatory system refers to the heart, blood vessels, and blood. The term cardiovascular system, however, refers only to the passages through which the blood flowsthe heart, a fourchambered muscular pump arteries, the vessels that carry blood away from the heart veins, the vessels that carry blood back to the heart and capillaries, microscopic blood vessels that connect the smallest arteries to the smallest veins. Structure of Cardiac Muscle Cardiac muscle is striated like skeletal muscle but otherwise differs from it in many structural and physiological ways. Cardiac myocytes muscle cells, or cardiocytes, are relatively short, thick, branched cells. They usually have only one, centrally placed nucleus. The sarcoplasmic reticulum SR is less developed than in skeletal muscle. The myocytes are joined end to end by thick connections called intercalated discs, which appear as dark lines thicker than the striations in properly stained tissue sections

Chunk 33:
. The myocytes are joined end to end by thick connections called intercalated discs, which appear as dark lines thicker than the striations in properly stained tissue sections. Gross Anatomy of the Heart Size, Shape, and Position of the Heart The heart is located in the thoracic cavity in the mediastinum, the area between the lungs. About twothirds of it lies to the left of the median plane . The broad superior portion of the heart, called the base, is the point of attachment for the great vessels described previously. Its inferior end, the apex,. The adult heart is about 9 cm 3.5 in. wide at the base, 13 cm 5 in. The Pericardium Is a doublewalled sac called the pericardium, composed of The parietal pericardium pericardial sac and visceral pericardium Between the parietal and visceral membranes is a space called the pericardial cavity

Chunk 34:
. It contains 5 to 30 mL of pericardial fluid, The Heart Wall The heart wall consists of three layers 1Epicardium, 2Myocardium, 3 Endocardium The Chambers The heart has four chambers .Blood returning The right and left atria. These are mostly posterior in position, so only a small portion of each is visible from the anterior aspect. Each atrium has a small earlike extension called an auricle that slightly increases its volume. The two inferior chambers, the right and left ventricles, are the pumps that eject blood into the arteries. The heart is crisscrossed by sulci grooves that mark the boundaries of the four chambers. The Valves To pump blood effectively, the heart needs valves that ensure a predominantly oneway flow. There is a valve between each atrium and its ventricle and at the exit from each ventricle into its great artery Each valve consists of two or three fibrous flaps of tissue called cusps

Chunk 35:
. There is a valve between each atrium and its ventricle and at the exit from each ventricle into its great artery Each valve consists of two or three fibrous flaps of tissue called cusps. The cuspid valves 1The right AV tricuspid valve has three cusps 2The left AV bicuspid valve has two also called mitral MYtrul Stringlike chordate tendineae CORdee tenDINeeee, reminiscent of the shroud lines of a parachute, connect the AV valve cusps to conical papillary muscles on the floor of the ventricle. The semilunar valves 1The pulmonary valve controls the opening from the right ventricle into the pulmonary trunk, 2The aortic valve controls the opening from the left ventricle into the aorta. Each has three cusps shaped somewhat like shirt pockets . The Lymphatic and Immune Systems The lymphatic system is composed of a network of vessels that penetrate nearly every tissue of the body, and a collection of tissues and organs that produce immune cells. The lymphatic system has three functions 1

Chunk 36:
. The lymphatic system has three functions 1. Fluid recovery. Fluid continually filters from our blood capillaries into the tissue spaces. 2. Immunity. As the lymphatic system recovers excess tissue fluid, it also picks up foreign cells and chemicals from the tissues. 3. Lipid absorption. In the small intestine, special lymphatic vessels absorb dietary lipids that are not absorbed by the blood capillaries The components of the lymphatic system 1Lymph and the Lymphatic Vessels Lymph is usually a clear, colorless fluid, similar to blood plasma but low in protein, has a milky appearance because of its high lipid content. ,contains a large number of lymphocytes also contain bacteria, viruses, cellular debris, or even traveling cancer cells. Lymphatic Vessels. 1 The right lymphatic duct begins in the right thoracic cavity with the union of the right jugular, subclavian, and bronchomediastinal trunks

Chunk 37:
. Lymphatic Vessels. 1 The right lymphatic duct begins in the right thoracic cavity with the union of the right jugular, subclavian, and bronchomediastinal trunks. It receives lymphatic drainagefrom the right arm and right side of the thorax and head and empties into the right subclavian vein 2 The thoracic duct, on the left, is larger and longer. It begins as a prominent sac in the abdominal cavity called the cisterna chyli and then passes through the diaphragm and up the mediastinum. It receives lymph from all parts of the body Lymphatic Cells and Tissues 1. T lymphocytes T cells. These are sonamed because they develop for a time in the thymus and later depend on thymic hormones. 2. B lymphocytes B cells. These are named for an organ in chickens the bursa of Fabricius1 in which they were first discovered. When activated, B cells differentiate into plasma cells, which produce circulating antibodies 3. Macrophages

Chunk 38:
. When activated, B cells differentiate into plasma cells, which produce circulating antibodies 3. Macrophages. These cells, derived from monocytes of the blood, phagocytize foreign matter antigens and display fragments of it to certain T cells, thus alerting the immune system to the presence of an enemy. 4. Dendritic cells. These are APCs found in the epidermis, mucous membranes, and lymphatic organs. In the skin, they are often called Langerhans cells. 5. Reticular cells. These are branched cells that contribute to the stroma connective tissue framework of the lymphatic organs and act as APCs in the thymus. Lymphatic Organs These organs include the lymph nodes, tonsils, thymus, and spleen. 1Lymph Nodes serve two functions to cleanse the lymph and alert the immune system to pathogens. There are hundreds of lymph nodes in the body

Chunk 39:
. 1Lymph Nodes serve two functions to cleanse the lymph and alert the immune system to pathogens. There are hundreds of lymph nodes in the body. They are especially concentrated in the cervical, axillary, and inguinal regions close to the body surface, and in thoracic, abdominal, and pelvic groups deep in the body cavities. Most of them are embedded in fat. 2Tonsils The tonsils are patches of lymphatic tissue located at the entrance to the pharynx, where they guard against ingested and inhaled pathogens. Each is covered by an epithelium and has deep pits called tonsillar crypts lined by lymphatic nodules 3Thymus The thymus is a member of both the lymphatic and endocrine systems. It houses developing lymphocytes and secretes hormones that regulate their later activity. It is located between the sternum and aortic arch in the superior mediastinum. The thymus is very large in the fetus and grows slightly during childhood, when it is most active

Chunk 40:
. It is located between the sternum and aortic arch in the superior mediastinum. The thymus is very large in the fetus and grows slightly during childhood, when it is most active. After age 14, however, it begins to undergo involution shrinkage so that it is quite small in adults . 4Spleen The spleen is the bodys largest lymphatic organ. It is located in the left hypochondriac region, just inferior to the diaphragm and dorsolateral to the stomach , It has a medial hilum penetrated by the splenic artery and vein and lymphatic vessels. The urinary system The urinary system thus has a very close physiological relationship with the endocrine, circulatory, and respiratory systems, Anatomically, the urinary system is closely associated with the reproductive system, Thus the urinary and reproductive systems are often collectively called the urogenital UG system,

Chunk 41:
. Function of urinary system 1Eliminating wastes from the body 2Homeostasis 3detoxify poisons, 4Synthesize glucose, 5Controlling electrolyte and acidbase balance, 6Blood pressure, erythrocyte count 7 The PO2 and PCO2 of the blood. The urinary system consists of six organs two kidneys, two ureters, the urinary bladder, and the urethra Gross Anatomy The kidneys lie against the posterior abdominal wall at the level of vertebrae T12 to L3. The right kidney is slightly lower than the left because of the space occupied by the liver above it. Each kidney weighs about 160 g and measures about 12 cm long, 5 cm wide, and 2.5 cm thickabout the size of a bar of bath soap. The lateral surface is convex while the medial surface is concave and has a slit, the hilum, where it receives the renal nerves, blood vessels, lymphatic vessels, and ureter. The left adrenal gland rests on the superior pole of that kidney, while the right adrenal gland is more medial, between the hilum and pole

Chunk 42:
. The left adrenal gland rests on the superior pole of that kidney, while the right adrenal gland is more medial, between the hilum and pole. The kidney is protected by three layers of connective tissue 1 a fibrous renal fascia, 2 the adipose capsule, 3 the renal capsule, The parenchyma is divided into two zones an outer renal cortex about 1 cm thick and an inner renal medulla facing the sinus. Extensions of the cortex called renal columns project toward the sinus and divide the medulla into 6 to 10 renal pyramids. Each pyramid is conical, with a broad base facing the cortex and a blunt point called the renal papilla. The papilla of each renal pyramid is nestled in a cup called a minor calyx .which collects its urine. Two or three minor calices converge to form a major calyx, and two or three major calices convergein the sinus to form the funnellike renal pelvis. The ureter is a tubular continuation of the renal pelvis that drains the urine down to the urinary bladder

Chunk 43:
. The ureter is a tubular continuation of the renal pelvis that drains the urine down to the urinary bladder. The Nephron Each kidney contains about 1.2 million functional units called nephrons the function of one nephron, A nephron consists of two principal parts a renal corpuscle where the blood plasma is filtered and a long renal tubule that processes this filtrate into urine. The Renal Corpuscle The renal corpuscle ,consists of a ball of capillaries called a enclosed in a twolayered glomerular Bowman capsule. The parietal outer layer of the capsule is a simple squamous epithelium, while the visceral layer consists of elaborate cells called podocytes wrapped around the capillaries. The Renal Tubule The renal uriniferous tubule is a duct that leads away from the glomerular capsule and ends at the tip of a medullary pyramid. It is about 3 cm long and divided into four major regions 1The proximal convoluted tubule, 2Nephron loop, 3 Distal convoluted tubule, 4Collecting duct

Chunk 44:
. It is about 3 cm long and divided into four major regions 1The proximal convoluted tubule, 2Nephron loop, 3 Distal convoluted tubule, 4Collecting duct. The Proximal Convoluted Tubule PCT arises from the glomerular capsule. It is the longest and most coiled of the four regions ,has a simple cuboidal epithelium with prominent microvilli a brush border The Nephron Loop After coiling extensively near the renal corpuscle, the PCT straightens out and forms a long Ushaped nephron loop loop of Henle. The Distal Convoluted Tubule When the nephron loop returns to the cortex, it coils again and forms the distal convoluted tubule DCT. This is shorter and less convoluted than the PCT, DCT is the end of the nephron. The Collecting Duct The DCTs of several nephrons drain into a straight tubule called the collecting duct, which passes down into the medulla

Chunk 45:
. The Collecting Duct The DCTs of several nephrons drain into a straight tubule called the collecting duct, which passes down into the medulla. Near the papilla, several collecting ducts merge to form a larger papillary duct Renal circulation The kidneys account for only 0.4 of the body weight, they receive about 21 of the cardiac output the renal fraction. Each kidney is supplied by a renal artery occasionally two or more arising from the aorta. The renal artery divides and eventually gives rise to a few interlobar arteries. One interlobar artery penetrates each renal column and travels between the pyramids it branches again to form the arcuate arteries, Each arcuate artery gives rise to several interlobular arteries, which pass upward into the cortex. The finer branches of the renal circulation As an interlobular artery ascends through the cortex, a series of afferent arterioles arise from it like the limbs of a pine tree

Chunk 46:
. The finer branches of the renal circulation As an interlobular artery ascends through the cortex, a series of afferent arterioles arise from it like the limbs of a pine tree. Each afferent arteriole supplies blood to one nephron and ends in the glomerulus described earlier. The glomerulus is drained by an efferent arteriole. The afferent and efferent arterioles penetrate one side of the glomerular capsule together. Just outside the capsule, they contact the first part of the distal convoluted tubule and with it, form a juxtaglomerular  apparatus. This is a device monitor and stabilize blood pressure. The efferent arteriole leads next to a plexus of peritubular capillaries, named for the fact that they form a network around the renal tubules. Blood flows from the peritubular capillaries to, in order, the interlobular veins, arcuate veins, interlobar veins, and renal vein, which travel parallel to the arteries of the same names

Chunk 47:
. Blood flows from the peritubular capillaries to, in order, the interlobular veins, arcuate veins, interlobar veins, and renal vein, which travel parallel to the arteries of the same names. The renal vein leaves the hilum and drains into the inferior vena cava. Endocrine system Endocrinology The study of the endocrine system and the diagnosis and treatment of its dysfunctions . endocrine system composed of glands that secrete its productshormones directly to blood stream,ductless. Hormones are chemical messengers that are secreted into the bloodstream and stimulate the physiology of cells in another tissue or organ. Endocrine glands 1The hypothalamus forms the floor and walls of the third ventricle of the brain It regulates primitive functions of the body ranging from water balance to sex drive. 2The pituitary gland hypophysis is suspended from the hypothalamus by a stalk .It is usually about 1.3 cm in diameter, but grows about 50 larger in pregnancy

Chunk 48:
. 2The pituitary gland hypophysis is suspended from the hypothalamus by a stalk .It is usually about 1.3 cm in diameter, but grows about 50 larger in pregnancy. It is actually composed of two structures a The adenohypophysis and neurohypophysis b The adenohypophysis . 3The Pineal Gland The pineal gland is a pine coneshaped growth on the roof of the third ventricle of the brain, beneath the posterior end of the corpus callosum mm long and 5 mm wide, It produces serotonin by day and melatonin at night. In animals with seasonal breeding, 4The Thymus The thymus is located in the mediastinum superior to the heart .Like the pineal, it is large in infants and children but involutes after puberty. In elderly people.The thymus secretes thymopoietin and thymosins, hormones that regulate the development and later activation of diseasefighting blood cells called T lymphocytes T forthymus

Chunk 49:
. In elderly people.The thymus secretes thymopoietin and thymosins, hormones that regulate the development and later activation of diseasefighting blood cells called T lymphocytes T forthymus. 5The Thyroid Gland The thyroid gland is the largest endocrine gland it weighs 20 to 25 g and receives one of the bodys highest rates of blood flow per gram of tissue. It is wrapped around the anterior and lateral aspects of the trachea, immediately below the larynx. It consists of two large lobes, one on each side of the trachea, connected by a narrow anterior isthmus Histologically, the thyroid is composed mostly of sacs called thyroid follicles Each is filled with a proteinrich colloid and lined by a simple cuboidal epithelium of follicular cells. These cells secrete two main thyroid hormonesT3, or triiodothyronine ,and thyroxine, also known as T4 or tetraiodothyronine

Chunk 50:
. These cells secrete two main thyroid hormonesT3, or triiodothyronine ,and thyroxine, also known as T4 or tetraiodothyronine . 6The Parathyroid Glands The parathyroid glands are partially embedded in the posterior surface of the thyroid There are usually four, each about 3 to 8 mm long and 2 to 5 mm wide. They secrete parathyroid hormone PTH in response to hypocalcemia. PTH raises blood calcium levels by promoting the synthesis of calcitriol. 7The Adrenal Glands An adrenal suprarenal gland sits like a cap on the superior pole of each kidney In adults, the adrenal is about 5 cm 2 in. long, 3 cm 1.2 in. wide, and weighs about 4 g it weighs about twice this much at birth. Its inner core, the adrenal medulla, produce epinephrine and nor epinephrine is a small portion of the total gland

Chunk 51:
. wide, and weighs about 4 g it weighs about twice this much at birth. Its inner core, the adrenal medulla, produce epinephrine and nor epinephrine is a small portion of the total gland. Surrounding it is a much thicker adrenal cortex produce ,cortisone ,cortisol ,and aldosterone  8The Pancreas The elongated spongy pancreas is located retroperitoneally, inferior and dorsal to the stomach It is approximately 15 cm long and 2.5 cm thick. Most of it is an exocrine digestive gland, but scattered through the exocrine tissue are endocrine cell clusters called pancreatic islets islets of Langerhans. 9The Gonads The gonads are both endocrine and exocrine. Their exocrine products are eggs and sperm, and their endocrine products are the gonadal hormones, most of which are steroids. Each follicle of the ovary contains an egg cell surrounded by a wall of granulosa cells

Chunk 52:
. Each follicle of the ovary contains an egg cell surrounded by a wall of granulosa cells . After ovulation, the corpusluteum secretes estradiol and progesterone for 12 days or so, or for 8 to 12 weeks in the event of pregnancy. The testis consists mainly of microscopic seminiferous tubules that produce sperm. Nestled between them are clusters of interstitial cells which produce testosterone and lesser amounts of weaker androgens and estrogen. Testosterone stimulates development of the male central nervous system The brain and spinal cord are referred to as the central nervous system CNS, the nerves connected with the brain are the cranial nerves whilst the nerves connecting the spinal cord to the body are referred to as the peripheral nervous system PNS. In human brain anatomy, one structure is rostral to another if it is closer to the forehead and caudal to another if it is closer to the spinal cord The average adult brain weighs about 1,600 g 3.5 lb in men and 1,450 g in women

Chunk 53:
. Its size is proportional to body size, not intelligencethe Neanderthal people had larger brains than modern human The brain is divided into three major portions 1The cerebrum constitutes about 83 ofits volume and consists of a pair of cerebral hemispheres. Each hemisphere is marked by thick folds called gyri separated by shallow grooves called sulci singular, sulcus. A very deep groove, the longitudinal fissure, separates the right and left hemispheres from each other. At the bottom of this fissure, the hemispheres are connected by a thick bundle of nerve fibers called the corpus callosum. Lobs of cerebrum 1. The frontal lobe lies immediately behind the frontal bone, superior to the orbits. 2. The parietal lobe forms the uppermost part of the nipple brain and underlies the parietal bone. 3. The occipital lobe is at the rear of the head underlying the occipital bone. It is the principal visual center of the brain. 4

Chunk 54:
. 3. The occipital lobe is at the rear of the head underlying the occipital bone. It is the principal visual center of the brain. 4. The temporal lobe is a lateral, horizontal lobe deep to the temporal bone, separated from the parietallobe above it by a deep lateral sulcus. 2The cerebellum SERehBELum lies inferior to the cerebrum and occupies the posterior cranial fossa. It is also marked by gyri, sulci, and fissures. The cerebellum is the secondlargest region of the brain it constitutes about10 of its volume but contains over 50 of its neurons. 3The brainstem It is oriented like a vertical stalk with the cerebrum perched on top of it like a mushroom cap. Postmortem changes give it a more oblique angle in the cadaver and consequently in many medical illustrations. The major components of the brainstem. a The diencephalon b Midbrain. c Pons. d medulla oblongata

Chunk 55:
. The major components of the brainstem. a The diencephalon b Midbrain. c Pons. d medulla oblongata. The brainstem ends at the foramen magnum of the skull and the central nervous system CNS continues below this as the spinal cord. Gray and White Matter The brain, like the spinal cord, is composed of gray and white matter. Gray matterthe seat of the neuron cell bodies, dendrites, and synapsesforms a surface layer called the cortex over the cerebrum and cerebellum, and deeper masses called nuclei surrounded by white matter. Meninges The meninges of the brain are basically the same as those of the spinal cord 1dura mater. 2 arachnoid mater 3pia mater In the cranial cavity, it consists of two layersan outer periosteal layer, equivalent to the periosteum of the cranial bone, and an inner meningeal layer. spinal cord

Chunk 56:
. 2 arachnoid mater 3pia mater In the cranial cavity, it consists of two layersan outer periosteal layer, equivalent to the periosteum of the cranial bone, and an inner meningeal layer. spinal cord. In some places, the two layers are separated by dural sinuses, Ventricles and Cerebrospinal Fluid The brain has four internal chambers called ventricles 1 lateral ventricles Form a large arc in each cerebral hemisphere. Through a tiny passage called the interventricular foramen,. 2 The third ventricle, A narrow medial space inferior to the corpus callosum. From here, a canal called the cerebral aqueduct passes down the core of the midbrain and leads to the 3Fourth ventricle, a small chamber between the pons and cerebellum. caudally, this space narrows and forms a central canal that extends through the medulla oblongata into the spinal cord. A clear, colorless liquid called cerebrospinal fluid CSF fills the ventricles and canals of the CNS and bathes its external surface

Chunk 57:
. A clear, colorless liquid called cerebrospinal fluid CSF fills the ventricles and canals of the CNS and bathes its external surface. The brain produces about 500 mL of CSF per day. Cerebrospinal fluid serves three purposes 1. Buoyancy. Because the brain and CSF are very similar in density, the brain neither sinks nor floats in the CSF but remains suspended in itthat is, thebrain has neutral buoyancy. 2. Protection. CSF also protects the brain from striking the cranium when the head is jolted. If the jolt issevere, however, the brain still may strike the inside of the cranium or suffer shearing injury from contact with the angular surfaces of the cranial floor. 2. Chemical stability. CSF is secreted into each ventricle of the brain and is ultimately absorbed into the bloodstream. 3. Spinal Cord anatomy The spinal cord is connected to the brain and is about the diameter of a human finger

Chunk 58:
. 3. Spinal Cord anatomy The spinal cord is connected to the brain and is about the diameter of a human finger. From the brain the spinal cord descends down the middle of the back and is surrounded and protected by the bony vertebral column. The spinal cord is surrounded by a clear fluid called cerebral spinal fluid CSF, that acts as a cushion to protect the delicate nerve tissues against damage from banging against the inside of the vertebrae. The anatomy of the spinal cord itself, consists of millions of nerve fibres which transmit electrical information to and from the limbs, trunk and organs of the body, back to and from the brain. The nerves which exit the spinal cord in the upper section, the neck, control breathing and the arms. The nerves which exit the spinal cord in the mid and lower section of the back, control the trunk and legs, as well as bladder, bowel and sexual function. The nerves which carry information from the brain to muscles are called motor neurones

Chunk 59:
. The nerves which carry information from the brain to muscles are called motor neurones. The nerves which carry information from the body back to the brain are called sensory neurones. Sensory neurones carry information to the brain about skin temperature, touch, pain and joint position. Spinal Nerves Nerves called the spinal nerves or nerve roots, branch off the spinal cord and pass out through a hole in each of the vertebrae called the foramen. These nerves carry information from the spinal cord to the rest of the body, and from the body back up to the brain. There are four main groups of spinal nerves, which exit different levels of the spinal cord. These are in descending order down the vertebral column 1Cervical Nerves C  nerves in the neck supply movement and feeling to the arms, neck and upper trunk. Also control breathing. 2Thoracic Nerves T  nerves in the upper back supply the trunk and abdomen

Chunk 60:
. Also control breathing. 2Thoracic Nerves T  nerves in the upper back supply the trunk and abdomen. 3Lumbar Nerves L 4 Sacral Nerves S  nerves in the lower back supply the legs, the bladder, bowel and sexual organs

Chunk 61:
. Skeletal system Grand Total 206 Axial Skeleton Skull Total 22 Cranial bones Frontal bone 1 Parietal bone 2 Occipital bone 1 Temporal bone 2 Sphenoid bone 1 Ethmoid bone 1 Facial bones Maxilla 2 Palatine bone 2 Zygomatic bone 2 Lacrimal bone 2 Nasal bone 2 Vomer 1 Inferior nasal conchae 2 Mandible 1 AppendicularSkeleton Pectoral Girdle Total 4 Scapula 2 Clavicle 2 Upper Limb Total 60 Humerus 2 Radius 2 Ulna 2 Carpals 16 Metacarpals 10 Phalanges 28 Auditory Ossicles Total 6 Malleus 2, Incus 2 Stapes 2 Hyoid Bone 1 Total 1 Vertebral Column Total 26 Cervical vertebrae 7 Thoracic vertebrae 12 Lumbar vertebrae 5 Sacrum 1 Coccyx 1 Thoracic Cage Total 25 Ribs 24 Sternum 1 Pelvic Girdle Total 2 Os coxae 2 Lower Limb Total 60 Femur 2 Patella 2 Tibia 2 Fibula 2 Tarsals 14 Metatarsals 10 Phalanges 28 Foramina  Infraorbital foramen  Lacrimal foramen  Greater palatine foramen Palatine nerves  Mental foramen Mental nerve and vessels  Foramen magnam  Supraorbital foramen Bones Associated with the

Chunk 62:
28 Foramina  Infraorbital foramen  Lacrimal foramen  Greater palatine foramen Palatine nerves  Mental foramen Mental nerve and vessels  Foramen magnam  Supraorbital foramen Bones Associated with the Skull Auditory Ossicles Malleus hammer Incus anvil Stapes stirrup Comparison of the Male and Female Pelves Male female General Appearance Tilt Ilium, greater pelvis Lesser Pelvis Sacrum Coccyx Width of Greater Pelvis Pelvic Inlet Pelvic Outlet Greater Sciatic Notch Obturator Foramen Acetabulum Pubic arch More massive rougher heavier processes Upper end of pelvis relatively vertical Deeper projects farther above sacroiliac joint Narrower and deeper Narrower and longer Less movable more verticalAnterior superior spines closer together, hips less flared Heartshaped Smaller Narrower RoundFaces more laterally, larger Usually 90 or less Less massive smoother Upper end of pelvis tilted forward Shallower Wider and shallower Shorter and wider More movable tilted dorsally Anterior superior spines

Chunk 63:
laterally, larger Usually 90 or less Less massive smoother Upper end of pelvis tilted forward Shallower Wider and shallower Shorter and wider More movable tilted dorsally Anterior superior spines farther apart Round or oval Larger Wider Triangular to oval Faces slightly ventrally,smaller Usually greater than 100 Comparison between male and female pelvis 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83  Nội dung từ file .pdf  Short Notes in ANATOMY First year  Nursing college By Dr

Chunk 64:
. Wasfi Dhahir 20172018 المعلىماث في هذه الم لز مت تعتبز خطىط دالت ومالحظاث تشيز الى المىاضيع المنهجيت ودليل لمزاجعت المصادر المعتمدة لهذه لمادة التشزيح References Kenneth.S Saladin 2007anatomy and physiology.4th edition Eliane N. Marieb 2007 human anatomy and physiology 7th edition San Francisco CA94111. Gary A and Kevin T 2007 anatomy and physiology 8th edition . printed by United States of America Anne W. na Allison Grant 2010 anatomy and physiology 11th edition .British library . printed in chaina. Susannah N . 2005 Mader, S understanding Human anatomy and physiology , 6th edition 3 Introduction of human body Human anatomy is one of the basic essential sciences of medicine, concerned with the study of the structure of organisms and their parts including their systems, organs and tissues. Anatomy mean cutting parts It includes 1The appearance 2Position of the various parts. 3The materials from which they are composed. 4 Their locations . 5Their relationships with other parts

Chunk 65:
. Anatomy mean cutting parts It includes 1The appearance 2Position of the various parts. 3The materials from which they are composed. 4 Their locations . 5Their relationships with other parts. Methods used include dissection, in which a body is opened and its organs studied, and endoscopy, in which a video cameraequipped instrument is inserted through a small incision in the body wall and used to explore the internal organs and other structures. Angiography using Xrays or magnetic resonance angiography are methods to visualize blood vessels. In addition to visual, there are three other methods by which anatomy is studied palpation, which is physical contact Auscultation, such as when a doctor listens to your breathing and percussion, such as when a doctor taps on your chest. Medical devices such as CT scans or magnetic resonance imaging MRI, and dissection can also be used to assist in the study of anatomy

Chunk 66:
. Medical devices such as CT scans or magnetic resonance imaging MRI, and dissection can also be used to assist in the study of anatomy. Types of anatomy Comparative anatomy description and comparison of the form and structure of different animals. Developmental anatomy the changes in form from fertilization to adulthood, including embryology, fetology and postnatal development. Gross anatomy Macroscopic anatomy that dealing with structures visible with the unaided eye. Called also macroscopic anatomy. Microscopic anatomy anatomy revealed by microscopy includes histology and cytology. Morbid anatomy anatomy of diseased tissues. Called also pathological anatomy. Pathological anatomy see morbid anatomy above. Radiological anatomy anatomy revealed by the techniques of radiography and fluoroscopy. Special anatomy anatomy devoted to study of particular organs or parts. Topographic anatomy that devoted to determination of relative positions of various body parts regional anatomy

Chunk 67:
. Special anatomy anatomy devoted to study of particular organs or parts. Topographic anatomy that devoted to determination of relative positions of various body parts regional anatomy. Xray anatomy Tissue cells All organisms, from the simplest to the most complex, are composed of cellswhether the single cell of a bacterium or the trillions of cells that constitute the human body. These cells are responsible for all structural and functional properties of a living organism. Cytology, is the science deal with the study of cell structure and function, is therefore indispensable to any true understanding of the workings of the human body, the mechanisms of disease, and the rationale of therapy. The modern cell theory 1. All organisms are composed of cells and cell products. 2. The cell is the simplest structural and functional unit of life. There are no smaller subdivisions of a cell or organism that, in themselves, are alive. 3

Chunk 68:
. 2. The cell is the simplest structural and functional unit of life. There are no smaller subdivisions of a cell or organism that, in themselves, are alive. 3. An organisms structure and all of its functions are ultimately due to the activities of its cells. 4. Cells come only from preexisting cells, not from nonliving matter. All life, therefore, traces its ancestry to the same original cells. 5. Because of this common ancestry, the cells of all species have many fundamental similarities in their chemical composition and metabolic mechanisms. Cell Shapes and Sizes Most human cells range from 10 to 15 micrometers um in diameter. The human egg cell, an exceptionally large 100 um in diameter. Elementary tissues of the body Human body generally consist of five elementary tissues 1Epithelial tissue consists of a flat sheet of closely adhering cells, one or more cells thick, with the upper surface usually exposed to the environment or to an internal space in the body

Chunk 69:
. Epithelium covers the body surface, lines body cavities, forms the external and internal linings of many organs, and constitutes most gland tissue. aSimple Epithelia Generally, a simple epithelium has only one layer of cells, although this is a somewhat debatable point in the pseudostratified type. Three types of simple epithelia are named for the shapes of their cells 1 simple squamous thin scaly cells. 2 simple cuboidalsquare or round cells, 3 simple columnar tall narrow cells. 4 pseudostratified columnar, not all cells reach the free surface the shorter cells are covered over by the taller ones. bStratified Epithelia Stratified epitheliarange from 2 to 20 or more layers ofcells, with some cells resting directly on others and only the deepest layer resting on the basement membrane. The stratified epithelia are three types 1 stratified squamous, 2 stratifiedcuboidal, 3 stratified columnar epithelia

Chunk 70:
. The stratified epithelia are three types 1 stratified squamous, 2 stratifiedcuboidal, 3 stratified columnar epithelia. 4 Transitional epithelium, was named when it was thought to represent a transitional stage between stratified squamous and stratified columnar epithelium. 2Connective tissue Typically consists mostly of fibers and ground substance, with widely separate Fibrous Connective Tissue aFibrous connective tissues are the most diverse type of connective tissue. They are also called fibroconnective tissue or connective tissue proper. The cells of fibrous connective tissue include the following types Fibroblasts. These are large, flat cells that often appear tapered at the ends and show slender, wispy branches. They produce the fibers and ground substance that form the matrix of the tissue.. Macrophages. These are large phagocytic cells that wander through the connective tissues, where theyengulf and destroy bacteria, that produce monocytes

Chunk 71:
. Macrophages. These are large phagocytic cells that wander through the connective tissues, where theyengulf and destroy bacteria, that produce monocytes. Leukocytes, white blood cells WBCs.WBCs travel briefly in the bloodstream, then crawl out through the capillary walls and spend most of theirtime in the connective tissues.. Plasma cells. Certain lymphocytes turn into plasma cells when they detect foreign agents. The plasma cells then synthesize diseasefighting proteins called antibodies. Mast cells. These cells, found especially alongside blood vessels, secrete a chemical called heparin that inhibits blood clotting, and one called histamine that increases blood flow by dilating blood vessels. AdipocytesADihposites. fat cells.These are large rounded cells filled mainly with a droplet of triglyceride, which forces the nucleus and cytoplasm to occupy only a thin layer just beneath the plasma membrane

Chunk 72:
. fat cells.These are large rounded cells filled mainly with a droplet of triglyceride, which forces the nucleus and cytoplasm to occupy only a thin layer just beneath the plasma membrane. Fibers Three types of protein fibers are found in fibrous connective tissues CollagenouscolLADJehnusfibers. These fibers, made of collagen, are tough and flexible and resist Reticular fibers. These are thin collagen fibers coated with glycoprotein. They form a spongelike framework for such organs as the spleen and lymph nodes. Elastic fibers. These are thinner than collagenous fibers, and they branch and rejoin each other along their course. They are made of a protein called elastin, whose coiled structure allows it to stretch and recoil like a rubber band. Ground Substance Amid the cells and fibers in some tissue sections, there appears to be a lot of empty space

Chunk 73:
. Ground Substance Amid the cells and fibers in some tissue sections, there appears to be a lot of empty space. In life, this space is occupied by the featureless ground substance.Ground substance usually has a gelatinous to rubbery consistency resulting from three classes of large molecules 1glycosaminoglycans. 2proteoglycans. 3adhesive glycoproteins. Types of Fibrous Connective Tissue 1 Loose connective tissue a Areolar AIReeOHlur tissue b Reticular tissue

Chunk 74:
. 2proteoglycans. 3adhesive glycoproteins. Types of Fibrous Connective Tissue 1 Loose connective tissue a Areolar AIReeOHlur tissue b Reticular tissue. c Adipose tissue ,or fat, 2 Dense connective tissue a Dense regular connective tissue Densely packed, parallel, often wavy collagen fibers slender fibroblast nuclei compressed between collagen bundles scanty open space ground substance scarcity of blood vessels b Dense irregular connective tissue Densely packed collagen fibers running in random directions scanty open space ground substance few visible cells scarcity of blood vessels 3Bone The term bonerefers both to organs of the body such as the femur and mandible, composed of multiple tissue types, and to the bone tissue, or osseous tissue,that makes up most of the mass of bones. There are two forms of osseous tissue 1Spongy bone fills the heads of the long bones. Although it is calcified and hard, its delicate slivers and plates give it a spongy appearance

Chunk 75:
. There are two forms of osseous tissue 1Spongy bone fills the heads of the long bones. Although it is calcified and hard, its delicate slivers and plates give it a spongy appearance. 2Compact dense Bone is a more dense calcified tissue with no spaces visible to the naked eye. It forms the external surfaces of all bones, so spongy bone, when present, is always covered by compact bone. Cartilage Cartilageis a supportive connective tissue with a flexible rubbery matrix. It gives shape to the external ear, the tip of the nose, and the larynx the most easily palpated cartilages in the body. Cells called chondroblasts a Hyaline cartilage Clear, glassy matrix, often stained light blue or pink in tissue sections fine, dispersed collagen fibers, not usually visible chondrocytes often in small clusters of three or four cells cell nests, enclosed in lacunae usually covered by perichondrium. b Elasic cartilage Elastic fibers form weblike mesh amid lacunae always covered by perichondrium

Chunk 76:
. b Elasic cartilage Elastic fibers form weblike mesh amid lacunae always covered by perichondrium. c Fibro cartilage Parallel collagen fibers similar to those of tendon rows of chondrocytes in lacunae between collagen fibers never has a perichondrium Blood Blood is a fluid connective tissue that travels through tubular vessels. Its primary function is to transport cells and dissolved matter from place to place. Blood consists of a ground substance called plasma and of cells and cell fragments collectively called formed elements. Erythrocytes ehRITHrosites, or red blood cells, are the most abundant formed elements. In stained blood films, they look like pink discs with a thin, pale center. They have no nuclei. Erythrocytes transport oxygen and carbon dioxide. Leukocytes, white blood cells, serve various roles in defense against infection and other diseases

Chunk 77:
. They have no nuclei. Erythrocytes transport oxygen and carbon dioxide. Leukocytes, white blood cells, serve various roles in defense against infection and other diseases. 4Nervous Tissue Nervous tissue consists of neuronsNOORons, or nerve cells, and a much greater number of neuroglia nooROGleeuh, or glial GLEEul cells ,which protect and assist the neurons. Neurons are specialized to detect stimuli, respond quickly, and transmit coded information rapidly to other cells. Each neuron has a prominent soma, or cell body, that houses the nucleus and most other organelles. This is the cells center of genetic control and protein synthesis. Somas are usually round, ovoid, or stellate in shape. Extending from the soma, there are usually multiple short, branched processes called dendrites that receive signals from other cells and transmit messages to the soma, and a single, much longer axon ,or nerve fiber, that sends outgoing signals to other cells

Chunk 78:
. Nervous tissue is found in the brain, spinal cord, nerves, and ganglia, which are knotlike swellings in nerves. 5Muscular Tissue Muscular tissue consists of elongated cells that are specialized to respond to stimulation by contracting thus, its primary job is to exert physical force on other tissues and organsfor example, when a skeletal muscle pulls on a bone, the heart contracts and expels blood, or the bladder contracts and expels urine. aSkeletal muscle Long, cylindrical, unbranched cells fibers, relatively parallel in longitudinal tissue sections striations multiple nuclei per cell, near plasma membrane. bCardiac muscle Short branched cells myocytes less parallel appearance in tissue sections striations intercalated discs one nucleus per cell, centrally located and often surrounded by a light zone. CSmooth muscle Short fusiform cells overlapping each other nonstriated one nucleus per cell, centrally located

Chunk 79:
. CSmooth muscle Short fusiform cells overlapping each other nonstriated one nucleus per cell, centrally located. Cell structure and function The plasma membrane Is the unit membrane at the cell surface. It defines the boundaries of the cell, governs its interactions with other cells, and controls the passage of materials into and out of the cell. The side that faces the cytoplasm is the intracellular face of the membrane, and the side that faces outward is the extracellular face. The plasma membranean oily film of lipids with diverse proteins embedded in it. Typically about 98 of the molecules in the membrane are lipids, and about 75 of the lipids are phospholipids. These amphiphilic molecules arrange themselves into a bilayer, with their hydrophilic phosphatecontaining heads facing the water on each side of the membrane and their hydrophobic tails directed toward the center of the membrane. Membrane Proteins 1 Integral transmembrane proteins, pass through the membrane

Chunk 80:
. Membrane Proteins 1 Integral transmembrane proteins, pass through the membrane. They have hydrophilic regions, most integral proteins are glycoproteins, which are conjugated with oligosaccharides on the extracellular side of the membrane. 2nPeripheral proteinsdo not protrude into the phospholipid layer but adhere to the intracellular face of the membrane. Membrane proteins include the following Receptors The chemical signals by which cells communicate with each other Secondmessenger systems.When a messenger binds to a surface receptor, it may trigger changes within the cell that produce a second messenger in the cytoplasm. Enzymes. Enzymes in the plasma membranes of cells carry out the final stages of starch and protein digestion in the small intestine, help produce second messengers, and break down hormones and other signaling molecules whose job is done, thus stopping them from excessively stimulating a cell

Chunk 81:
. Channel proteins Channel proteins are integral proteins with pores that allow passage of water and hydrophilic solutes through the Carriers Carriers are integral proteins that bind to glucose, electrolytes, and other solutes and transfer them to the other side of the membrane. Some carriers, called pumps,consume ATP in the process. Molecular motors These proteins produce movement by changing shape and pulling on other molecules. Cellidentity markers . Are glycoproteins contribute to the glycocalyx,a carbohydrate surface coating discussed shortly.  Celladhesion molecules. Cells adhere to one another and to extracellular material through certain membrane proteins called celladhesion molecules CAMs. Cellular compartments in cell biology comprise all of the closed parts within the cytosol of a eukaryotic cell, usually surrounded by a single or double lipid layer membrane. These compartments are often, but not always, defined as membrane enclosed regions

Chunk 82:
. These compartments are often, but not always, defined as membrane enclosed regions. The formation of cellular compartments is called compartmentalization. Most organelles are compartments 1mitochondria is a double membranebound organelle found in most eukaryotic cells. The word mitochondrion comes from the Greek μίτος, mitos, i.e. thread, and χονδρίον, chondrion, i.e. granule2 or grainlike. It is also the powerhouse of the cell. 2peroxisomes, lysosomes, Also called microbodies are organelles found in virtually all eukaryotic cells.2 They are involved in the catabolism of very long chain fatty acids . 3 the endoplasmic reticulum Is a type of organelle in the cells of eukaryotic organisms that forms an interconnected network of flattened, membraneenclosed sacs or tubelike structures known as cisternae. The endoplasm is the inner core of the cytoplasm and the membranes of the ER are continuous with the outer nuclear membrane 4 the cell nucleus In cell biology, the nucleus pl

Chunk 83:
. The endoplasm is the inner core of the cytoplasm and the membranes of the ER are continuous with the outer nuclear membrane 4 the cell nucleus In cell biology, the nucleus pl. nuclei from Latin nucleus or nuculeus, meaning kernel is a membraneenclosed organelle found in eukaryotic cells. Eukaryotes usually have a single nucleus, but a few cell types have no nuclei, and a few others have many. Cell nuclei contain most of the cells genetic material. 5 Golgi apparatus. known as the Golgi complex, Golgi body, or simply the Golgi, is an organelle found in most eukaryotic cells. It was identified in 1897 by the Italian physician Camillo Golgi and named after him in 1898. Golgi body is a part of the cellular endomembrane system, the Golgi apparatus packages proteins into membranebound vesicles inside the cell before the vesicles are sent to their destination. 6 Smaller elements like vesicles, and sometimes even microtubules can also be counted as compartments

Chunk 84:
. 6 Smaller elements like vesicles, and sometimes even microtubules can also be counted as compartments. SKIN Skin is the soft outer covering of vertebrates. The adjective cutaneous means of the skin from Latin cutis, skin. The skin is an organ of the integumentary system made up of multiple layers of ectodermal tissue, The skin interfaces with the environment and is the 1first line of defense from external factors. 2 excessive water loss 3insulation, 4 temperature regulation 5 sensation. 6The production of vitamin D. Skin layers Epidermis The epidermis is composed of the outermost layers of the skin. Keratinocytes are the major cells, constituting 95 of the epidermiswhile Merkel cells, melanocytes and Langerhans cells are also present. The epidermis contains no blood vessels, and cells in the deepest layers are nourished by diffusion from blood capillaries extending to the upper layers of the dermis

Chunk 85:
. The epidermis contains no blood vessels, and cells in the deepest layers are nourished by diffusion from blood capillaries extending to the upper layers of the dermis. The epidermis can be further subdivided into the following strata or layers beginning with the outermost layer. Stratum corneum Stratum lucidum only in palms and soles Stratum granulosum Stratum spinosum Stratum germinativum also called the stratum basale Keratinocytes in the stratum basale proliferate through mitosis and the daughter cells move up the strata changing shape and composition as they undergo multiple stages of cell differentiation to eventually become anucleated

Chunk 86:
. During that process, keratinocytes will become highly organized, forming cellular junctions desmosomes between each other and secreting keratin proteins and lipids which contribute to the formation of an extracellular matrix and provide mechanical strength to the skin Keratinocytes from the stratum corneum are eventually shed from the surface desquamation. Basement membrane The epidermis and dermis are separated by a thin sheet of fibers called the basement membrane, and is made through the action of both tissues. The basement membrane controls the traffic of the cells and molecules between the dermis and . Dermis The dermis is the layer of skin beneath the epidermis that consists of connective tissue and cushions the body from stress and strain. Papillary region The papillary region is composed of loose areolar connective tissue.This is named for its fingerlike projections called papillae that extend toward the epidermis

Chunk 87:
. Papillary region The papillary region is composed of loose areolar connective tissue.This is named for its fingerlike projections called papillae that extend toward the epidermis. The papillae provide the dermis with a bumpy surface that interdigitates with the epidermis, strengthening the connection between the two layers of skin. Reticular region The reticular region lies deep in the papillary region and is usually much thicker. It is composed of dense irregular connective tissue . within the reticular region are the roots of the hair, sebaceous glands, sweat glands, receptors, nails, and blood vessels. Hypodermis The hypodermis is not part of the skin, and lies below the dermis. Its purpose is to attach the skin to underlying bone and muscle as well as supplying it with blood vessels and nerves. It consists of loose connective tissue and elastin. Basrah University College of Nursing Department of medical sciences Lecturer Dr

Chunk 88:
. It consists of loose connective tissue and elastin. Basrah University College of Nursing Department of medical sciences Lecturer Dr. Wasfi Dhahir Subject Anatomyy Stage1st nursing Digestive system The science which study the digestive tract and the diagnosis and treatment and its disorders called gastroenterology. Anatomically the digestive system subdivided for two anatomical parts 1The digestive tract is a tube extending from mouth to anus and called alimentary canal include mouth , pharynx, esophagus, stomach, small intestine and large intestine. Stomach and intestine called GI gastrointestinal tract. 2The accessory organs include teeth tongue, salivary gland, liver, gall bladder and pancreas. The main function of the digestive system is to processes food and extracts nutrient from it and eliminate the residue and this occur in four stages 1 Ingestion The selective intake of food 2 Digestion Mechanical and chemical break down of food

Chunk 89:
. 3 Absorption uptake of nutrients molecules into the epithelial cells of digestive tract to blood and lymph. 4 Defecation the elimination of indigestive residue. Most of the digestive tract follows the basic structural composed of the following tissue layers, in order from the inner to the outersurface Mucosa Epithelium Lamina propria Muscularis mucosae Submucosa Muscularis externa Inner circular layer Outer longitudinal layer The mouth The moth oral cavity serves for ingestion. Sensory response to food, mastication. Chemical digestion ,deglutition, speech and respiration. The mouth is enclosed by the cheeks, lips, palate, and tongue . Its anterior opening between the lips is the oral orifice and its posterior opening into the throat is the fauces FAWseez. The oral cavity is lined with non keratinized stratified squamous epithelium. Mastication is the breakdown of food into pieces smaller to be walled and exposed it to chemical digestion

Chunk 90:
. The oral cavity is lined with non keratinized stratified squamous epithelium. Mastication is the breakdown of food into pieces smaller to be walled and exposed it to chemical digestion. Salivary gland There are three pairs of salivary gland aextrinsic 1Parotid gland 2submandibular gland 3Sublingual gland bintrinsic 1 Lingual 2 Buccle 3 labial Function of saliva The gland secrete about 11 L of saliva per day 1. moisten 2. Digest starch. 3. Clean the mouth. 4. Inhibit bacterial growth. 5  Make the food as bolus. The pharynx is muscular funnel and it is of two parts, the respiratory part  nasopharynx and the oral part  orapharynx and aid in swallowing

Chunk 91:
. 4. Inhibit bacterial growth. 5  Make the food as bolus. The pharynx is muscular funnel and it is of two parts, the respiratory part  nasopharynx and the oral part  orapharynx and aid in swallowing. The esophagus muscular tube extend from pharynx till stomach lubricated by mucosa., its main function swallowing of food and drink to stomach which drop by gravity and peristalsis movement, The stomach  is J  shape relatively vertical in tall people and horizontal in short people have two curvature ,the lesser and greater curvature and two opening the in latecardiac orifice and pyloric orifice the gate way

Chunk 92:
. and four regions 1 The fundus 2 The body 3 Pyloric 4 Antrum Function of the stomach  Storing  Mixing  Digestion  Emptying The cell of stomach  Mucosal cell secrete mucus  Stem cells produce new cells  Parietal cells secrete HCL  Chief cells secrete chymosinPepsinogen and lipase  Enteroendocrine cells secrete hormones The small intestine It began at the pyloric orifice the gate way from stomach and ends at the ileocecal junction gate way of the large intestine. It consist of duodenum25cm ,jejunum2.5meter and ileum3.6 meter the internal surface contain villi with absorptive cells and goblet cells. The movement of intestine include segmentation contraction and wave of peristalsis called migration motor complex

Chunk 93:
. The movement of intestine include segmentation contraction and wave of peristalsis called migration motor complex. Chemical digestion and absorption in small intestine  Amylase digests the starch to monosaccharide  Pepsin digests proteins to amino acids  Lipids digests by lingual lipase and gastric lipase and most of it digested by pancreatic lipase and bile helps in breaking the fat into emulsification droplets to triglycerides and to monoglycerides and fatty acids and then absorbed to blood through villi. Large intestine It is about 1.5 meter consist of the cecum, ascending colon right site of abdomen , descending colonleft site of abdomen , transverse colon, rectum , anal canal and anus

Chunk 94:
. Large intestine It is about 1.5 meter consist of the cecum, ascending colon right site of abdomen , descending colonleft site of abdomen , transverse colon, rectum , anal canal and anus. The large intestine absorbs water and salts from indigestible food, Accessory organs The liver Is largest reddish brown gland located immediately inferior to the diaphragm in the right hypocondral and Epigastric region, has four lobes left ,right ,quadrate and caudate lobes separated from each other by falciform ligament. Gall bladder Greenish sac on the underside of the liver which store and concentrate billwater, fat , cholesterol, phospholipids, bile pigment and bile acids act on lipids digestion Note Bile pigments cause the brown color of feces Pancreas pink lobulated gland located between the fold of the duodenum secrete hormoneinsulin and glucagon and enzyme lipase , amylase and trypsin ,chymotrepsin and carboxypeptidase which digest proteins

Chunk 95:
. Cardiovascular System The term circulatory system refers to the heart, blood vessels, and blood. The term cardiovascular system, however, refers only to the passages through which the blood flowsthe heart, a fourchambered muscular pump arteries, the vessels that carry blood away from the heart veins, the vessels that carry blood back to the heart and capillaries, microscopic blood vessels that connect the smallest arteries to the smallest veins. Structure of Cardiac Muscle Cardiac muscle is striated like skeletal muscle but otherwise differs from it in many structural and physiological ways. Cardiac myocytes muscle cells, or cardiocytes, are relatively short, thick, branched cells. They usually have only one, centrally placed nucleus. The sarcoplasmic reticulum SR is less developed than in skeletal muscle. The myocytes are joined end to end by thick connections called intercalated discs, which appear as dark lines thicker than the striations in properly stained tissue sections

Chunk 96:
. The myocytes are joined end to end by thick connections called intercalated discs, which appear as dark lines thicker than the striations in properly stained tissue sections. Gross Anatomy of the Heart Size, Shape, and Position of the Heart The heart is located in the thoracic cavity in the mediastinum, the area between the lungs. About twothirds of it lies to the left of the median plane . The broad superior portion of the heart, called the base, is the point of attachment for the great vessels described previously. Its inferior end, the apex,. The adult heart is about 9 cm 3.5 in. wide at the base, 13 cm 5 in. The Pericardium Is a doublewalled sac called the pericardium, composed of The parietal pericardium pericardial sac and visceral pericardium Between the parietal and visceral membranes is a space called the pericardial cavity

Chunk 97:
. It contains 5 to 30 mL of pericardial fluid, The Heart Wall The heart wall consists of three layers 1Epicardium, 2Myocardium, 3 Endocardium The Chambers The heart has four chambers .Blood returning The right and left atria. These are mostly posterior in position, so only a small portion of each is visible from the anterior aspect. Each atrium has a small earlike extension called an auricle that slightly increases its volume. The two inferior chambers, the right and left ventricles, are the pumps that eject blood into the arteries. The heart is crisscrossed by sulci grooves that mark the boundaries of the four chambers. The Valves To pump blood effectively, the heart needs valves that ensure a predominantly oneway flow. There is a valve between each atrium and its ventricle and at the exit from each ventricle into its great artery Each valve consists of two or three fibrous flaps of tissue called cusps

Chunk 98:
. There is a valve between each atrium and its ventricle and at the exit from each ventricle into its great artery Each valve consists of two or three fibrous flaps of tissue called cusps. The cuspid valves 1The right AV tricuspid valve has three cusps 2The left AV bicuspid valve has two also called mitral MYtrul Stringlike chordate tendineae CORdee tenDINeeee, reminiscent of the shroud lines of a parachute, connect the AV valve cusps to conical papillary muscles on the floor of the ventricle. The semilunar valves 1The pulmonary valve controls the opening from the right ventricle into the pulmonary trunk, 2The aortic valve controls the opening from the left ventricle into the aorta. Each has three cusps shaped somewhat like shirt pockets . The Lymphatic and Immune Systems The lymphatic system is composed of a network of vessels that penetrate nearly every tissue of the body, and a collection of tissues and organs that produce immune cells. The lymphatic system has three functions 1

Chunk 99:
. The lymphatic system has three functions 1. Fluid recovery. Fluid continually filters from our blood capillaries into the tissue spaces. 2. Immunity. As the lymphatic system recovers excess tissue fluid, it also picks up foreign cells and chemicals from the tissues. 3. Lipid absorption. In the small intestine, special lymphatic vessels absorb dietary lipids that are not absorbed by the blood capillaries The components of the lymphatic system 1Lymph and the Lymphatic Vessels Lymph is usually a clear, colorless fluid, similar to blood plasma but low in protein, has a milky appearance because of its high lipid content. ,contains a large number of lymphocytes also contain bacteria, viruses, cellular debris, or even traveling cancer cells. Lymphatic Vessels. 1 The right lymphatic duct begins in the right thoracic cavity with the union of the right jugular, subclavian, and bronchomediastinal trunks

Chunk 100:
. Lymphatic Vessels. 1 The right lymphatic duct begins in the right thoracic cavity with the union of the right jugular, subclavian, and bronchomediastinal trunks. It receives lymphatic drainagefrom the right arm and right side of the thorax and head and empties into the right subclavian vein 2 The thoracic duct, on the left, is larger and longer. It begins as a prominent sac in the abdominal cavity called the cisterna chyli and then passes through the diaphragm and up the mediastinum. It receives lymph from all parts of the body Lymphatic Cells and Tissues 1. T lymphocytes T cells. These are sonamed because they develop for a time in the thymus and later depend on thymic hormones. 2. B lymphocytes B cells. These are named for an organ in chickens the bursa of Fabricius1 in which they were first discovered. When activated, B cells differentiate into plasma cells, which produce circulating antibodies 3. Macrophages

Chunk 101:
. When activated, B cells differentiate into plasma cells, which produce circulating antibodies 3. Macrophages. These cells, derived from monocytes of the blood, phagocytize foreign matter antigens and display fragments of it to certain T cells, thus alerting the immune system to the presence of an enemy. 4. Dendritic cells. These are APCs found in the epidermis, mucous membranes, and lymphatic organs. In the skin, they are often called Langerhans cells. 5. Reticular cells. These are branched cells that contribute to the stroma connective tissue framework of the lymphatic organs and act as APCs in the thymus. Lymphatic Organs These organs include the lymph nodes, tonsils, thymus, and spleen. 1Lymph Nodes serve two functions to cleanse the lymph and alert the immune system to pathogens. There are hundreds of lymph nodes in the body

Chunk 102:
. 1Lymph Nodes serve two functions to cleanse the lymph and alert the immune system to pathogens. There are hundreds of lymph nodes in the body. They are especially concentrated in the cervical, axillary, and inguinal regions close to the body surface, and in thoracic, abdominal, and pelvic groups deep in the body cavities. Most of them are embedded in fat. 2Tonsils The tonsils are patches of lymphatic tissue located at the entrance to the pharynx, where they guard against ingested and inhaled pathogens. Each is covered by an epithelium and has deep pits called tonsillar crypts lined by lymphatic nodules 3Thymus The thymus is a member of both the lymphatic and endocrine systems. It houses developing lymphocytes and secretes hormones that regulate their later activity. It is located between the sternum and aortic arch in the superior mediastinum. The thymus is very large in the fetus and grows slightly during childhood, when it is most active

Chunk 103:
. It is located between the sternum and aortic arch in the superior mediastinum. The thymus is very large in the fetus and grows slightly during childhood, when it is most active. After age 14, however, it begins to undergo involution shrinkage so that it is quite small in adults . 4Spleen The spleen is the bodys largest lymphatic organ. It is located in the left hypochondriac region, just inferior to the diaphragm and dorsolateral to the stomach , It has a medial hilum penetrated by the splenic artery and vein and lymphatic vessels. The urinary system The urinary system thus has a very close physiological relationship with the endocrine, circulatory, and respiratory systems, Anatomically, the urinary system is closely associated with the reproductive system, Thus the urinary and reproductive systems are often collectively called the urogenital UG system,

Chunk 104:
. Function of urinary system 1Eliminating wastes from the body 2Homeostasis 3detoxify poisons, 4Synthesize glucose, 5Controlling electrolyte and acidbase balance, 6Blood pressure, erythrocyte count 7 The PO2 and PCO2 of the blood. The urinary system consists of six organs two kidneys, two ureters, the urinary bladder, and the urethra Gross Anatomy The kidneys lie against the posterior abdominal wall at the level of vertebrae T12 to L3. The right kidney is slightly lower than the left because of the space occupied by the liver above it. Each kidney weighs about 160 g and measures about 12 cm long, 5 cm wide, and 2.5 cm thickabout the size of a bar of bath soap. The lateral surface is convex while the medial surface is concave and has a slit, the hilum, where it receives the renal nerves, blood vessels, lymphatic vessels, and ureter. The left adrenal gland rests on the superior pole of that kidney, while the right adrenal gland is more medial, between the hilum and pole

Chunk 105:
. The left adrenal gland rests on the superior pole of that kidney, while the right adrenal gland is more medial, between the hilum and pole. The kidney is protected by three layers of connective tissue 1 a fibrous renal fascia, 2 the adipose capsule, 3 the renal capsule, The parenchyma is divided into two zones an outer renal cortex about 1 cm thick and an inner renal medulla facing the sinus. Extensions of the cortex called renal columns project toward the sinus and divide the medulla into 6 to 10 renal pyramids. Each pyramid is conical, with a broad base facing the cortex and a blunt point called the renal papilla. The papilla of each renal pyramid is nestled in a cup called a minor calyx .which collects its urine. Two or three minor calices converge to form a major calyx, and two or three major calices convergein the sinus to form the funnellike renal pelvis. The ureter is a tubular continuation of the renal pelvis that drains the urine down to the urinary bladder

Chunk 106:
. The ureter is a tubular continuation of the renal pelvis that drains the urine down to the urinary bladder. The Nephron Each kidney contains about 1.2 million functional units called nephrons the function of one nephron, A nephron consists of two principal parts a renal corpuscle where the blood plasma is filtered and a long renal tubule that processes this filtrate into urine. The Renal Corpuscle The renal corpuscle ,consists of a ball of capillaries called a enclosed in a twolayered glomerular Bowman capsule. The parietal outer layer of the capsule is a simple squamous epithelium, while the visceral layer consists of elaborate cells called podocytes wrapped around the capillaries. The Renal Tubule The renal uriniferous tubule is a duct that leads away from the glomerular capsule and ends at the tip of a medullary pyramid. It is about 3 cm long and divided into four major regions 1The proximal convoluted tubule, 2Nephron loop, 3 Distal convoluted tubule, 4Collecting duct

Chunk 107:
. It is about 3 cm long and divided into four major regions 1The proximal convoluted tubule, 2Nephron loop, 3 Distal convoluted tubule, 4Collecting duct. The Proximal Convoluted Tubule PCT arises from the glomerular capsule. It is the longest and most coiled of the four regions ,has a simple cuboidal epithelium with prominent microvilli a brush border The Nephron Loop After coiling extensively near the renal corpuscle, the PCT straightens out and forms a long Ushaped nephron loop loop of Henle. The Distal Convoluted Tubule When the nephron loop returns to the cortex, it coils again and forms the distal convoluted tubule DCT. This is shorter and less convoluted than the PCT, DCT is the end of the nephron. The Collecting Duct The DCTs of several nephrons drain into a straight tubule called the collecting duct, which passes down into the medulla

Chunk 108:
. The Collecting Duct The DCTs of several nephrons drain into a straight tubule called the collecting duct, which passes down into the medulla. Near the papilla, several collecting ducts merge to form a larger papillary duct Renal circulation The kidneys account for only 0.4 of the body weight, they receive about 21 of the cardiac output the renal fraction. Each kidney is supplied by a renal artery occasionally two or more arising from the aorta. The renal artery divides and eventually gives rise to a few interlobar arteries. One interlobar artery penetrates each renal column and travels between the pyramids it branches again to form the arcuate arteries, Each arcuate artery gives rise to several interlobular arteries, which pass upward into the cortex. The finer branches of the renal circulation As an interlobular artery ascends through the cortex, a series of afferent arterioles arise from it like the limbs of a pine tree

Chunk 109:
. The finer branches of the renal circulation As an interlobular artery ascends through the cortex, a series of afferent arterioles arise from it like the limbs of a pine tree. Each afferent arteriole supplies blood to one nephron and ends in the glomerulus described earlier. The glomerulus is drained by an efferent arteriole. The afferent and efferent arterioles penetrate one side of the glomerular capsule together. Just outside the capsule, they contact the first part of the distal convoluted tubule and with it, form a juxtaglomerular  apparatus. This is a device monitor and stabilize blood pressure. The efferent arteriole leads next to a plexus of peritubular capillaries, named for the fact that they form a network around the renal tubules. Blood flows from the peritubular capillaries to, in order, the interlobular veins, arcuate veins, interlobar veins, and renal vein, which travel parallel to the arteries of the same names

Chunk 110:
. Blood flows from the peritubular capillaries to, in order, the interlobular veins, arcuate veins, interlobar veins, and renal vein, which travel parallel to the arteries of the same names. The renal vein leaves the hilum and drains into the inferior vena cava. Endocrine system Endocrinology The study of the endocrine system and the diagnosis and treatment of its dysfunctions . endocrine system composed of glands that secrete its productshormones directly to blood stream,ductless. Hormones are chemical messengers that are secreted into the bloodstream and stimulate the physiology of cells in another tissue or organ. Endocrine glands 1The hypothalamus forms the floor and walls of the third ventricle of the brain It regulates primitive functions of the body ranging from water balance to sex drive. 2The pituitary gland hypophysis is suspended from the hypothalamus by a stalk .It is usually about 1.3 cm in diameter, but grows about 50 larger in pregnancy

Chunk 111:
. 2The pituitary gland hypophysis is suspended from the hypothalamus by a stalk .It is usually about 1.3 cm in diameter, but grows about 50 larger in pregnancy. It is actually composed of two structures a The adenohypophysis and neurohypophysis b The adenohypophysis . 3The Pineal Gland The pineal gland is a pine coneshaped growth on the roof of the third ventricle of the brain, beneath the posterior end of the corpus callosum mm long and 5 mm wide, It produces serotonin by day and melatonin at night. In animals with seasonal breeding, 4The Thymus The thymus is located in the mediastinum superior to the heart .Like the pineal, it is large in infants and children but involutes after puberty. In elderly people.The thymus secretes thymopoietin and thymosins, hormones that regulate the development and later activation of diseasefighting blood cells called T lymphocytes T forthymus

Chunk 112:
. In elderly people.The thymus secretes thymopoietin and thymosins, hormones that regulate the development and later activation of diseasefighting blood cells called T lymphocytes T forthymus. 5The Thyroid Gland The thyroid gland is the largest endocrine gland it weighs 20 to 25 g and receives one of the bodys highest rates of blood flow per gram of tissue. It is wrapped around the anterior and lateral aspects of the trachea, immediately below the larynx. It consists of two large lobes, one on each side of the trachea, connected by a narrow anterior isthmus Histologically, the thyroid is composed mostly of sacs called thyroid follicles Each is filled with a proteinrich colloid and lined by a simple cuboidal epithelium of follicular cells. These cells secrete two main thyroid hormonesT3, or triiodothyronine ,and thyroxine, also known as T4 or tetraiodothyronine

Chunk 113:
. These cells secrete two main thyroid hormonesT3, or triiodothyronine ,and thyroxine, also known as T4 or tetraiodothyronine . 6The Parathyroid Glands The parathyroid glands are partially embedded in the posterior surface of the thyroid There are usually four, each about 3 to 8 mm long and 2 to 5 mm wide. They secrete parathyroid hormone PTH in response to hypocalcemia. PTH raises blood calcium levels by promoting the synthesis of calcitriol. 7The Adrenal Glands An adrenal suprarenal gland sits like a cap on the superior pole of each kidney In adults, the adrenal is about 5 cm 2 in. long, 3 cm 1.2 in. wide, and weighs about 4 g it weighs about twice this much at birth. Its inner core, the adrenal medulla, produce epinephrine and nor epinephrine is a small portion of the total gland

Chunk 114:
. wide, and weighs about 4 g it weighs about twice this much at birth. Its inner core, the adrenal medulla, produce epinephrine and nor epinephrine is a small portion of the total gland. Surrounding it is a much thicker adrenal cortex produce ,cortisone ,cortisol ,and aldosterone  8The Pancreas The elongated spongy pancreas is located retroperitoneally, inferior and dorsal to the stomach It is approximately 15 cm long and 2.5 cm thick. Most of it is an exocrine digestive gland, but scattered through the exocrine tissue are endocrine cell clusters called pancreatic islets islets of Langerhans. 9The Gonads The gonads are both endocrine and exocrine. Their exocrine products are eggs and sperm, and their endocrine products are the gonadal hormones, most of which are steroids. Each follicle of the ovary contains an egg cell surrounded by a wall of granulosa cells

Chunk 115:
. Each follicle of the ovary contains an egg cell surrounded by a wall of granulosa cells . After ovulation, the corpusluteum secretes estradiol and progesterone for 12 days or so, or for 8 to 12 weeks in the event of pregnancy. The testis consists mainly of microscopic seminiferous tubules that produce sperm. Nestled between them are clusters of interstitial cells which produce testosterone and lesser amounts of weaker androgens and estrogen. Testosterone stimulates development of the male central nervous system The brain and spinal cord are referred to as the central nervous system CNS, the nerves connected with the brain are the cranial nerves whilst the nerves connecting the spinal cord to the body are referred to as the peripheral nervous system PNS. In human brain anatomy, one structure is rostral to another if it is closer to the forehead and caudal to another if it is closer to the spinal cord The average adult brain weighs about 1,600 g 3.5 lb in men and 1,450 g in women

Chunk 116:
. Its size is proportional to body size, not intelligencethe Neanderthal people had larger brains than modern human The brain is divided into three major portions 1The cerebrum constitutes about 83 ofits volume and consists of a pair of cerebral hemispheres. Each hemisphere is marked by thick folds called gyri separated by shallow grooves called sulci singular, sulcus. A very deep groove, the longitudinal fissure, separates the right and left hemispheres from each other. At the bottom of this fissure, the hemispheres are connected by a thick bundle of nerve fibers called the corpus callosum. Lobs of cerebrum 1. The frontal lobe lies immediately behind the frontal bone, superior to the orbits. 2. The parietal lobe forms the uppermost part of the nipple brain and underlies the parietal bone. 3. The occipital lobe is at the rear of the head underlying the occipital bone. It is the principal visual center of the brain. 4

Chunk 117:
. 3. The occipital lobe is at the rear of the head underlying the occipital bone. It is the principal visual center of the brain. 4. The temporal lobe is a lateral, horizontal lobe deep to the temporal bone, separated from the parietallobe above it by a deep lateral sulcus. 2The cerebellum SERehBELum lies inferior to the cerebrum and occupies the posterior cranial fossa. It is also marked by gyri, sulci, and fissures. The cerebellum is the secondlargest region of the brain it constitutes about10 of its volume but contains over 50 of its neurons. 3The brainstem It is oriented like a vertical stalk with the cerebrum perched on top of it like a mushroom cap. Postmortem changes give it a more oblique angle in the cadaver and consequently in many medical illustrations. The major components of the brainstem. a The diencephalon b Midbrain. c Pons. d medulla oblongata

Chunk 118:
. The major components of the brainstem. a The diencephalon b Midbrain. c Pons. d medulla oblongata. The brainstem ends at the foramen magnum of the skull and the central nervous system CNS continues below this as the spinal cord. Gray and White Matter The brain, like the spinal cord, is composed of gray and white matter. Gray matterthe seat of the neuron cell bodies, dendrites, and synapsesforms a surface layer called the cortex over the cerebrum and cerebellum, and deeper masses called nuclei surrounded by white matter. Meninges The meninges of the brain are basically the same as those of the spinal cord 1dura mater. 2 arachnoid mater 3pia mater In the cranial cavity, it consists of two layersan outer periosteal layer, equivalent to the periosteum of the cranial bone, and an inner meningeal layer. spinal cord

Chunk 119:
. 2 arachnoid mater 3pia mater In the cranial cavity, it consists of two layersan outer periosteal layer, equivalent to the periosteum of the cranial bone, and an inner meningeal layer. spinal cord. In some places, the two layers are separated by dural sinuses, Ventricles and Cerebrospinal Fluid The brain has four internal chambers called ventricles 1 lateral ventricles Form a large arc in each cerebral hemisphere. Through a tiny passage called the interventricular foramen,. 2 The third ventricle, A narrow medial space inferior to the corpus callosum. From here, a canal called the cerebral aqueduct passes down the core of the midbrain and leads to the 3Fourth ventricle, a small chamber between the pons and cerebellum. caudally, this space narrows and forms a central canal that extends through the medulla oblongata into the spinal cord. A clear, colorless liquid called cerebrospinal fluid CSF fills the ventricles and canals of the CNS and bathes its external surface

Chunk 120:
. A clear, colorless liquid called cerebrospinal fluid CSF fills the ventricles and canals of the CNS and bathes its external surface. The brain produces about 500 mL of CSF per day. Cerebrospinal fluid serves three purposes 1. Buoyancy. Because the brain and CSF are very similar in density, the brain neither sinks nor floats in the CSF but remains suspended in itthat is, thebrain has neutral buoyancy. 2. Protection. CSF also protects the brain from striking the cranium when the head is jolted. If the jolt issevere, however, the brain still may strike the inside of the cranium or suffer shearing injury from contact with the angular surfaces of the cranial floor. 2. Chemical stability. CSF is secreted into each ventricle of the brain and is ultimately absorbed into the bloodstream. 3. Spinal Cord anatomy The spinal cord is connected to the brain and is about the diameter of a human finger

Chunk 121:
. 3. Spinal Cord anatomy The spinal cord is connected to the brain and is about the diameter of a human finger. From the brain the spinal cord descends down the middle of the back and is surrounded and protected by the bony vertebral column. The spinal cord is surrounded by a clear fluid called cerebral spinal fluid CSF, that acts as a cushion to protect the delicate nerve tissues against damage from banging against the inside of the vertebrae. The anatomy of the spinal cord itself, consists of millions of nerve fibres which transmit electrical information to and from the limbs, trunk and organs of the body, back to and from the brain. The nerves which exit the spinal cord in the upper section, the neck, control breathing and the arms. The nerves which exit the spinal cord in the mid and lower section of the back, control the trunk and legs, as well as bladder, bowel and sexual function. The nerves which carry information from the brain to muscles are called motor neurones

Chunk 122:
. The nerves which carry information from the brain to muscles are called motor neurones. The nerves which carry information from the body back to the brain are called sensory neurones. Sensory neurones carry information to the brain about skin temperature, touch, pain and joint position. Spinal Nerves Nerves called the spinal nerves or nerve roots, branch off the spinal cord and pass out through a hole in each of the vertebrae called the foramen. These nerves carry information from the spinal cord to the rest of the body, and from the body back up to the brain. There are four main groups of spinal nerves, which exit different levels of the spinal cord. These are in descending order down the vertebral column 1Cervical Nerves C  nerves in the neck supply movement and feeling to the arms, neck and upper trunk. Also control breathing. 2Thoracic Nerves T  nerves in the upper back supply the trunk and abdomen

Chunk 123:
. Also control breathing. 2Thoracic Nerves T  nerves in the upper back supply the trunk and abdomen. 3Lumbar Nerves L 4 Sacral Nerves S  nerves in the lower back supply the legs, the bladder, bowel and sexual organs

Chunk 124:
. Skeletal system Grand Total 206 Axial Skeleton Skull Total 22 Cranial bones Frontal bone 1 Parietal bone 2 Occipital bone 1 Temporal bone 2 Sphenoid bone 1 Ethmoid bone 1 Facial bones Maxilla 2 Palatine bone 2 Zygomatic bone 2 Lacrimal bone 2 Nasal bone 2 Vomer 1 Inferior nasal conchae 2 Mandible 1 AppendicularSkeleton Pectoral Girdle Total 4 Scapula 2 Clavicle 2 Upper Limb Total 60 Humerus 2 Radius 2 Ulna 2 Carpals 16 Metacarpals 10 Phalanges 28 Auditory Ossicles Total 6 Malleus 2, Incus 2 Stapes 2 Hyoid Bone 1 Total 1 Vertebral Column Total 26 Cervical vertebrae 7 Thoracic vertebrae 12 Lumbar vertebrae 5 Sacrum 1 Coccyx 1 Thoracic Cage Total 25 Ribs 24 Sternum 1 Pelvic Girdle Total 2 Os coxae 2 Lower Limb Total 60 Femur 2 Patella 2 Tibia 2 Fibula 2 Tarsals 14 Metatarsals 10 Phalanges 28 Foramina  Infraorbital foramen  Lacrimal foramen  Greater palatine foramen Palatine nerves  Mental foramen Mental nerve and vessels  Foramen magnam  Supraorbital foramen Bones Associated with the

Chunk 125:
28 Foramina  Infraorbital foramen  Lacrimal foramen  Greater palatine foramen Palatine nerves  Mental foramen Mental nerve and vessels  Foramen magnam  Supraorbital foramen Bones Associated with the Skull Auditory Ossicles Malleus hammer Incus anvil Stapes stirrup Comparison of the Male and Female Pelves Male female General Appearance Tilt Ilium, greater pelvis Lesser Pelvis Sacrum Coccyx Width of Greater Pelvis Pelvic Inlet Pelvic Outlet Greater Sciatic Notch Obturator Foramen Acetabulum Pubic arch More massive rougher heavier processes Upper end of pelvis relatively vertical Deeper projects farther above sacroiliac joint Narrower and deeper Narrower and longer Less movable more verticalAnterior superior spines closer together, hips less flared Heartshaped Smaller Narrower RoundFaces more laterally, larger Usually 90 or less Less massive smoother Upper end of pelvis tilted forward Shallower Wider and shallower Shorter and wider More movable tilted dorsally Anterior superior spines

Chunk 126:
laterally, larger Usually 90 or less Less massive smoother Upper end of pelvis tilted forward Shallower Wider and shallower Shorter and wider More movable tilted dorsally Anterior superior spines farther apart Round or oval Larger Wider Triangular to oval Faces slightly ventrally,smaller Usually greater than 100 Comparison between male and female pelvis 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83  Nội dung từ file 04.11.4_Pathology_of_the_Eye_final.pdf  ProiaDUMC 1 Introduction to Ophthalmic Pathology Alan D

Chunk 127:
. Proia, M.D., Ph.D. April 2011 I tried to add some questions in this notesgroup. I hope you ﬁnd this useful as you study and review. I hope it is not too onerous. Comments or questions Andrew Ishizuka asi5duke.edu ProiaDUMC 2 Copyright Statement This lecture was prepared for the Duke University School of Medicine. It may be used without written or verbal permission by the author. It may be distributed to students, faculty, or health care practitioners I ask only that the source of the materials be acknowledged during their use. In developing this presentation, I have included copyrighted materials from other sources, which can be used in facetoface teaching under US copyright law. Any use beyond this presentation may require permission from the copyright holder. ProiaDUMC 3 Objectives  To be familiar with the pathological features of the most common blinding diseases in the U.S.A

Chunk 128:
. ProiaDUMC 3 Objectives  To be familiar with the pathological features of the most common blinding diseases in the U.S.A.  Cataracts  Glaucoma  Diabetes mellitus  Agerelated macular degeneration  To be aware of the most common primary intraocular malignant tumors of adults and children  Uveal melanoma  Retinoblastoma Take a moment to memorize these common causes of blindness. Adults typically Children typically ProiaDUMC 4 Anatomy of the Eye ProiaDUMC 5 CATARACTS are extremely common and many people have cataract surgery by the time they are 70. ProiaDUMC 6 Crystalline Lens  Provides refraction, in addition to that from the cornea  Lens capsule basement membrane encloses the epithelium and lens fibers  Cataract lenticular opacity  Many histological forms depending on location of cataractous change within the lens  A major cause of blindness There are many ways to get opacity in the lens. The variants are described next

Chunk 129:
. The variants are described next. ProiaDUMC 7 Arch Ophthalmol 2004122477485 Deﬁnition of blindness is vision worse than 20200 in the best eye with corrections. ProiaDUMC 8 Crystalline Lens  Anterior Capsule Epithelium Lens Fibers The lens capsule is thicker anteriorly than posteriorly. Also, there are no epithelial cells in healthy lenses posteriorly. ProiaDUMC 9 Crystalline Lens  Posterior Capsule Lens Fibers In a cataract surgery, the lens ﬁbers are sonicated, vacuumed out, and replaced by an artiﬁcial lens. Sometimes the thin posterior capsule ruptures. ProiaDUMC 10 Brunescent Brown Cataract This discoloration will cause changes in color vision. ProiaDUMC 11 Anterior Subcapsular Cataract Ant. Subcap. Cataract Note the proliferation in the epithelial cell layer beneath the capsule, which does not allow light to pass normally. ProiaDUMC 12 Nuclear Cataract Nuclear Cataract Here there is liquefaction of the inner part of the lens, which doesnt allow light to pass normally

Chunk 130:
. ProiaDUMC 12 Nuclear Cataract Nuclear Cataract Here there is liquefaction of the inner part of the lens, which doesnt allow light to pass normally. The ripples which are actually artifacts are not conserved throughout because of liquefaction. ProiaDUMC 13 Nuclear Cataract ProiaDUMC 14 Posterior Subcapsular Cataract Bladder cells This is a BLADDER CELL distended lens ﬁber cell that are still nucleated. It is a classic ﬁnding of Posterior Subcapsular Cataract. ProiaDUMC 15 Soemmerring Ring Cataract Soemmerring Ring Cataract is a BENIGN side effect of cataract surgery. There is proliferation of lens epithelial cells at the lens margins that do NOT obstruct vision because it is behind the iris. ProiaDUMC 16 Soemmerring Ring Cataract Note the eosinophilic nodules that are behind the iris
